---
title: 'Notes on Social Epistemology: Essential Readings'
date: 2022-07-20
permalink: /posts/2022/07/social-epistemology/
tags:
  - social epistemology
  - social studies of science
---

The collective book *Social Epistemology: Essential Readings* [^1] edited by Alvin I. Goldman and Dennis Whitcomb introduces the topic of social epistemology by bringing together several chapters discussing a variety of problems that may be attached to it. Those chapters are useful not as much for the results that they provide rather than as an illustration of the wide scope of questions that may be addressed by social epistemology. Readers who are interested like me in diverse topics such as sociology of science, the cultural brain hypothesis in anthropology, or institutional design in political science, will find useful insights connected to each of these matters in social epistemology -- which is what makes this introduction exciting to read and the whole enterprise attractive. It is in light of the diversity of social epistemology, that Alvin I. Goldman proposes that the topic may be split into three categories.

The first kind of social epistemology departs from more traditional individualistic epistemology by considering "individual doxastic agents with social evidence"; it is mostly concerned about how knowledge transmitted by others should be incorporated into one's beliefs. Typically, this line of inquiry encompasses questions such as: on what grounds one may rationally trust testimonies or experts on certain matters they do not know (much) about? How should peers manage conflicting statements about the truth of certain propositions?

The second kind of social epistemology treats social groups such as institutions as epistemic agents themselves, holding their own beliefs -- for this reason, it is referred to as "collective doxastic agents social epistemology", or "CDA SE" in the text. A typical issue in that context is the aggregation of conflicting individual beliefs into one collective judgement. Several contributions address the challenges raised by such a task -- for instance, the impossibility for collective judgments to simultaneously fulfill a number of requirements such as the logical consistency of these judgments. Another interesting issue is, under what conditions certain aggregation procedures (such as majority vote) may be more efficient at attaining truth. These questions are of high relevance for assessing certain institutional frameworks.

One step further is the third kind of social epistemology discussed in the book, which Alvin I. Goldman labels as "system oriented social epistemology", or "SYSOR SE".  This aspect of social epistemology is more concerned about the epistemic outcome of certain institutional designs: what kind of knowledge certain institutional rules may produce? The book addresses diverse examples: common law versus the civil law, Wikipedia, "deliberating groups versus prediction markets".

Although the book addresses matters that have very wide applications (including democracy, journalism, the judiciary system, etc.), it is of course of high relevance for studies of science. The obvious fundamental reason is that science, especially "Big Science" (as a massive, large-scale social phenomenon) heavily relies on a complex division of labour.

Although social studies of science now have a long history, I find the approach(es) offered by social epistemology quite illuminating in contrast. The reason stems from what is a broad impression which I will not attempt to justify thoroughly. Roughly speaking, \textit{critical} social studies of science sought to demonstrate how social phenomena (e.g. power) challenge certain views of science on which rests its perceived authority. Such work has the effect, arguably justifiably, of diminishing the status of "science" - and as a result it has sometimes been accused of reducing science to the mere pursuit of certain interests. I believe that the approach(es) taken on by social epistemology are more positive, by emphasizing the epistemic power of certain processes or institutional arrangements for combining individual knowledge. In that respect the social is not a threat to knowledge but rather the basis for progress, under conditions which are to be the focus of a fruitful and much needed discussion. The last chapter of the book "The Communication Structure of Epistemic Communities" (by Kevin J. S.Zollman), illustrates how valuable social epistemology may be to studies of science by providing tools for evaluating the efficiency of certain social networks for learning.


[^1]: Goldman, Alvin I. and Dennis Whitcomb (eds), 2011, *Social Epistemology: Essential Readings*, New York: Oxford University Press
